README.adoc, before:

= AsciiDoc Xref Proof of Concept

This repo contains a "code-as-documentation" example of a proposed cross-reference addressing (and related syntax) scheme for AsciiDoc documents.

This README contains a description of what is being proposed, as well as some research notes.

== The test

To try it out:

```
$ ruby test.rb > results.html
```

The resulting HTML document displays each test environment (including a description of what is being tested) and a table displaying the result of each cross-reference link. Best viewed in a browser.

The document has already been generated and can be viewed here:

link:https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/ratfactor/xref.adoc/blob/main/results.html[The HTML Results]

The source of the output document is, of course, in this repo. Look for `results.html`.

=== What the application tests:

* Correct handling of document name and location ID in xrefs (addressing).
* Relative "path segments" in document names.
* Proof-of-concept of xrefs independent of publishing 

=== What the application does NOT test:

* Any kind of AsciiDoc lexing or parsing (the xref links all have labels, for example).
* Input validation - these tests are all syntactically and semantically correct and the paths are correct.
* Filesystem handling (but that's kind of the whole point).
* Content output generation (HTML links are created as an example because they are ubiquitous and HTML output can be one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-one in relation to the input source).

== Proposing AsciiDoc Cross-Reference Addressing

AsciiDoc documents may make cross-reference links to:

* A location in the same document (by ID)
* A location in another document (by document name and location ID)
* Another document (by document name)

Cross-reference links to other documents must be be within a "document set".

The document name may include multiple segments separated by "/" which resemble a file path.  Cross-reference links may reference other documents with names that are relative to the current document in a manner similar to URIs like so:

If made in a document named `foo/bar.adoc`, the following links would resolve like so:

|===
|Xref Link | Points to

|baz.adoc | foo/baz.adoc
|beep/boop.adoc | foo/beep/boop.adoc
|../home.adoc | home.adoc
|../qux/biff.adoc | qux/biff.adoc
|===

These _look_ like file paths (and they might very well correspond with actual file paths), but the name segments are system-independent.

They allow documents to be organized into a hierarchical tree.
The use of "path-like" names with "/" separators is entirely optional.

Note, also, that the `.adoc` suffix at the end of each example document name _looks_ like a file extension (and, as before, may very well correspond actual file names), but there do not need to be files with these names (or any files at all!). The `.adoc` suffix is part of the document name and helps AsciiDoc implementations identify document names (as opposed to location IDs) in the xref syntax. For more on that, read on!

== Cross-reference ("xref") syntax

An AsciiDoc cross-references have the following syntax:

----
xref:DOCUMENT-NAME#LOCATION-ID[LABEL]
----

Or the alternate compact form:

----
<<DOCUMENT-NAME#LOCATION-ID,LABEL>>
----

With the following rules:

* `DOCUMENT-NAME` must refer to the relative path name of another AsciiDoc document within a "document set".
* If the `#` is _not_ present, the `DOCUMENT-NAME` _must_ end in the string ".adoc".
* If the `#` is present, the ".adoc" ending may left off of the `DOCUMENT-NAME` and is implied.
* Either a `DOCUMENT-NAME` _or_ `LOCATION-ID` is required.
* If both `DOCUMENT-NAME` _and_ `LOCATION-ID` are present, they must be separated with `#`.
* `LABEL` is optional _unless_ the `DOCUMENT-NAME` is provided (current tooling cannot infer the title)
* If the `LABEL` is not present, the `[]` may remain empty in the first form and the `,` may be left off in the second compact `<<>>` form.

=== Examples of "xref" syntax

The regular inline macro form:

----
xref:foo[Foo]             - a link to a location in the same document with ID "foo"
xref:bar#[Bar]            - a link to a document named "bar.adoc"
xref:bar.adoc[Bar]        - same
xref:bar.adoc#[Bar]       - same
xref:bar#foo[Foobar]      - a link to location ID "foo" in document "bar.adoc"
xref:bar.adoc#foo[Foobar] - same
----

The same cross-reference links in the alternative syntax:

----
<<foo,Foo>> 
<<bar#,Bar>> 
<<bar.adoc,Bar>> *
<<bar.adoc#,Bar>> 
<<bar#foo,Foobar>>
<<bar.adoc#foo,Foobar>>
----

Note that the form marked with a `*` doesn't currently work in _existing_ AsciiDoc implementations! It _does_ work in this test application.

== Researching prior art

=== URI

The one linking method to rule them all is the World Wide Web's URI spec, the latest version of which is described in RFC3986:

https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.html

> A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) provides a simple and extensible means for identifying a resource.

The URI scheme meets goals that are a bit loftier than what is needed for cross-referencing AsciiDoc locations/documents.

_However_, link:https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.html#section-3.3[Section 3.3 Path] seems very appropriate for identifying the absolute and relative location of a document in a set of documentation.

Specifically, it seems we could lift these portions wholesale:

----
   A path consists of a sequence of path segments separated by a slash
   ("/") character.  ...

   The path segments "." and "..", also known as dot-segments, are
   defined for relative reference within the path name hierarchy.  They
   are intended for use at the beginning of a relative-path reference
   (Section 4.2) to indicate relative position within the hierarchical
   tree of names.  This is similar to their role within some operating
   systems' file directory structures to indicate the current directory
   and parent directory, respectively.  However, unlike in a file
   system, these dot-segments are only interpreted within the URI path
   hierarchy and are removed as part of the resolution process (Section
   5.2).
----

=== Sphinx

Sphinx uses reStructuredText (reST):

* Sphinx https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sphinx_(documentation_generator)
* Sphinx https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/
* reST https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText
* reST https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html

Sphinx/reST has explicit support for cross-referencing to locations in other files:

> To support cross-referencing to arbitrary locations in any document, the standard reST labels are used. For this to work label names must be unique throughout the entire documentation.

Example of normal cross-reference:

----
 .. _my-reference-label:

 Section to cross-reference
 --------------------------

 This is the text of the section.

 It refers to the section itself, see :ref:`my-reference-label`.
----

The documentation explains that this will also work across files automatically!

https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#cross-referencing-arbitrary-locations

Sphinx _also_ has explicit support for linking to other reST documents! And note the lack of file extension:

> Link to the specified document; the document name can be specified in absolute or relative fashion. For example, if the reference :doc:`parrot` occurs in the document sketches/index, then the link refers to sketches/parrot. If the reference is :doc:`/people` or :doc:`../people`, the link refers to people.

> If no explicit link text is given (like usual: :doc:`Monty Python members </people>`), the link caption will be the title of the given document.


There's also a project that lets you write Sphinx documentation in Markdown and it supports these linking rules as well:

> There is no need to put the role. It should just be [Link text](/myMDfile) or the relative path with [Link text](myMDfile).

https://github.com/readthedocs/recommonmark/issues/108


== Texinfo

The GNU Texinfo syntax for writing manuals has the ability to cross-reference other documents:

> Ordinarily, you must always name a node in a cross-reference. However, it’s not unusual to want to refer to another manual as a whole, rather than a particular section within it. In this case, giving any section name is an unnecessary distraction.

> So, with cross-references to other manuals (see Four and Five Arguments), if the first argument is either ‘Top’ (capitalized just that way) or omitted entirely, and the third argument is omitted, the printed output includes no node or section name. (The Info output includes ‘Top’ if it was given.) 

Example, where `make` is the name of the manual to link to:

----
@xref{Top,,, make, The GNU Make Manual}.
----

https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/html_node/Referring-to-a-Manual-as-a-Whole.html
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texinfo


== Org-mode

Not surprisingly, Org-mode has a crazy number of link options:

https://orgmode.org/manual/Link-Format.html
https://orgmode.org/manual/Internal-Links.html
https://orgmode.org/manual/External-Links.html

Amusingly, "internal links" reverse AsciiDoc's `[[]]` and `<<>>` anchor and xref syntax:

----
<<foo>> This is info about foo.

Here is a link to [[foo]].
----

But most relevant to the AsciiDoc situation is Org-mode's publishing process, which is impressive:

> To create a link from one Org file to another, you would use something like ‘[[file:foo.org][The foo]]’ or simply ‘[[file:foo.org]]’ (see External Links). When published, this link becomes a link to ‘foo.html’. You can thus interlink the pages of your “Org web” project and the links will work as expected when you publish them to HTML. If you also publish the Org source file and want to link to it, use an ‘http’ link instead of a ‘file:’ link, because ‘file’ links are converted to link to the corresponding ‘.html’ file. 

> Eventually, links between published documents can contain some search options (see Search Options), which will be resolved to the appropriate location in the linked file. For example, once published to HTML, the following links all point to a dedicated anchor in ‘foo.html’.

----
    [[file:foo.org::*heading]]
    [[file:foo.org::#custom-id]]
    [[file:foo.org::target]]
----

https://orgmode.org/manual/Publishing-links.html


== Wikis

From the original WikiWikiWeb to MediaWiki, linking between documents ("pages") is fundamental to Wikis.

----
A link in WikiWikiWeb is CamelCaseLikeThis.

A link in MediaWiki uses brackets like [[foo]] or  [[foo|Foo Description]].
----

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WikiWikiWeb
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creole_(markup)

Wiki pages may or may not be stored in files and they are often converted on the fly to HTML for viewing. It is fundamental to wikis that all link conversion is completely automatic and as frictionless as possible.


== TeX / LaTeX

It looks like inter-document linking can absolutely be done, but it requires additional "packages" such as `xr` and/or `zref`. But the "external document" has to be declared in the calling document. I don't think this is something to be emulated.

https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/14364/cross-referencing-between-different-files

== troff/Groff/nroff/etc.

Troff is truly for stand-alone documents and manual pages. They have traditional bibiographic-style "references", but virtually no concept of linking other than URL hyperlinks and email address links (which PDF and HTML export types seem to understand) (which PDF and HTML export types seem to understand).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troff
https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/groff_man.7.html

Commit message:

Add lack of root xrefs to README

README.adoc, after:

= AsciiDoc Xref Proof of Concept

This repo contains a "code-as-documentation" example of a proposed cross-reference addressing (and related syntax) scheme for AsciiDoc documents.

This README contains a description of what is being proposed, as well as some research notes.

== The test

To try it out:

```
$ ruby test.rb > results.html
```

The resulting HTML document displays each test environment (including a description of what is being tested) and a table displaying the result of each cross-reference link. Best viewed in a browser.

The document has already been generated and can be viewed here:

link:https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/ratfactor/xref.adoc/blob/main/results.html[The HTML Results]

The source of the output document is, of course, in this repo. Look for `results.html`.

=== What the application tests:

* Correct handling of document name and location ID in xrefs (addressing).
* Relative "path segments" in document names.
* Proof-of-concept of xrefs independent of publishing 

=== What the application does NOT test:

* Any kind of AsciiDoc lexing or parsing (the xref links all have labels, for example).
* Input validation - these tests are all syntactically and semantically correct and the paths are correct.
* Filesystem handling (but that's kind of the whole point).
* Content output generation (HTML links are created as an example because they are ubiquitous and HTML output can be one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-one in relation to the input source).

== Proposing AsciiDoc Cross-Reference Addressing

AsciiDoc documents may make cross-reference links to:

* A location in the same document (by ID)
* A location in another document (by document name and location ID)
* Another document (by document name)

Cross-reference links to other documents must be be within a "document set".

The document name may include multiple segments separated by "/" which resemble a file path.  Cross-reference links may reference other documents with names that are relative to the current document in a manner similar to URIs like so:

If made in a document named `foo/bar.adoc`, the following links would resolve like so:

|===
|Xref Link | Points to

|baz.adoc | foo/baz.adoc
|beep/boop.adoc | foo/beep/boop.adoc
|../home.adoc | home.adoc
|../qux/biff.adoc | qux/biff.adoc
|===

These _look_ like file paths (and they might very well correspond with actual file paths), but the name segments are system-independent.

They allow documents to be organized into a hierarchical tree.
The use of "path-like" names with "/" separators is entirely optional.

The `.adoc` suffix at the end of each example document name _looks_ like a file extension (and, as before, may very well correspond actual file names), but there do not need to be files with these names (or any files at all!). The `.adoc` suffix is part of the document name and helps AsciiDoc implementations identify document names (as opposed to location IDs) in the xref syntax. For more on that, read on!

A cross-reference link should not start with a `/`. Doing so will result in "undefined behavior" (to allow AsciiDoc implementations to continue to handle this situation as they do now for backward compatibility). A `/` at the beginning of the link would seem to imply the "root" or "base" directory of the document set. This might be a handy thing to have, but is a new concept would doubtlessly clash with existing behavior.

== Cross-reference ("xref") syntax

An AsciiDoc cross-references have the following syntax:

----
xref:DOCUMENT-NAME#LOCATION-ID[LABEL]
----

Or the alternate compact form:

----
<<DOCUMENT-NAME#LOCATION-ID,LABEL>>
----

With the following rules:

* `DOCUMENT-NAME` must refer to the relative path name of another AsciiDoc document within a "document set".
* If the `#` is _not_ present, the `DOCUMENT-NAME` _must_ end in the string ".adoc".
* If the `#` is present, the ".adoc" ending may left off of the `DOCUMENT-NAME` and is implied.
* Either a `DOCUMENT-NAME` _or_ `LOCATION-ID` is required.
* If both `DOCUMENT-NAME` _and_ `LOCATION-ID` are present, they must be separated with `#`.
* `LABEL` is optional _unless_ the `DOCUMENT-NAME` is provided (current tooling cannot infer the title)
* If the `LABEL` is not present, the `[]` may remain empty in the first form and the `,` may be left off in the second compact `<<>>` form.

=== Examples of "xref" syntax

The regular inline macro form:

----
xref:foo[Foo]             - a link to a location in the same document with ID "foo"
xref:bar#[Bar]            - a link to a document named "bar.adoc"
xref:bar.adoc[Bar]        - same
xref:bar.adoc#[Bar]       - same
xref:bar#foo[Foobar]      - a link to location ID "foo" in document "bar.adoc"
xref:bar.adoc#foo[Foobar] - same
----

The same cross-reference links in the alternative syntax:

----
<<foo,Foo>> 
<<bar#,Bar>> 
<<bar.adoc,Bar>> *
<<bar.adoc#,Bar>> 
<<bar#foo,Foobar>>
<<bar.adoc#foo,Foobar>>
----

Note that the form marked with a `*` doesn't currently work in _existing_ AsciiDoc implementations! It _does_ work in this test application.

== Researching prior art

=== URI

The one linking method to rule them all is the World Wide Web's URI spec, the latest version of which is described in RFC3986:

https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.html

> A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) provides a simple and extensible means for identifying a resource.

The URI scheme meets goals that are a bit loftier than what is needed for cross-referencing AsciiDoc locations/documents.

_However_, link:https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.html#section-3.3[Section 3.3 Path] seems very appropriate for identifying the absolute and relative location of a document in a set of documentation.

Specifically, it seems we could lift these portions wholesale:

----
   A path consists of a sequence of path segments separated by a slash
   ("/") character.  ...

   The path segments "." and "..", also known as dot-segments, are
   defined for relative reference within the path name hierarchy.  They
   are intended for use at the beginning of a relative-path reference
   (Section 4.2) to indicate relative position within the hierarchical
   tree of names.  This is similar to their role within some operating
   systems' file directory structures to indicate the current directory
   and parent directory, respectively.  However, unlike in a file
   system, these dot-segments are only interpreted within the URI path
   hierarchy and are removed as part of the resolution process (Section
   5.2).
----

=== Sphinx

Sphinx uses reStructuredText (reST):

* Sphinx https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sphinx_(documentation_generator)
* Sphinx https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/
* reST https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ReStructuredText
* reST https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html

Sphinx/reST has explicit support for cross-referencing to locations in other files:

> To support cross-referencing to arbitrary locations in any document, the standard reST labels are used. For this to work label names must be unique throughout the entire documentation.

Example of normal cross-reference:

----
 .. _my-reference-label:

 Section to cross-reference
 --------------------------

 This is the text of the section.

 It refers to the section itself, see :ref:`my-reference-label`.
----

The documentation explains that this will also work across files automatically!

https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#cross-referencing-arbitrary-locations

Sphinx _also_ has explicit support for linking to other reST documents! And note the lack of file extension:

> Link to the specified document; the document name can be specified in absolute or relative fashion. For example, if the reference :doc:`parrot` occurs in the document sketches/index, then the link refers to sketches/parrot. If the reference is :doc:`/people` or :doc:`../people`, the link refers to people.

> If no explicit link text is given (like usual: :doc:`Monty Python members </people>`), the link caption will be the title of the given document.


There's also a project that lets you write Sphinx documentation in Markdown and it supports these linking rules as well:

> There is no need to put the role. It should just be [Link text](/myMDfile) or the relative path with [Link text](myMDfile).

https://github.com/readthedocs/recommonmark/issues/108


== Texinfo

The GNU Texinfo syntax for writing manuals has the ability to cross-reference other documents:

> Ordinarily, you must always name a node in a cross-reference. However, it’s not unusual to want to refer to another manual as a whole, rather than a particular section within it. In this case, giving any section name is an unnecessary distraction.

> So, with cross-references to other manuals (see Four and Five Arguments), if the first argument is either ‘Top’ (capitalized just that way) or omitted entirely, and the third argument is omitted, the printed output includes no node or section name. (The Info output includes ‘Top’ if it was given.) 

Example, where `make` is the name of the manual to link to:

----
@xref{Top,,, make, The GNU Make Manual}.
----

https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/html_node/Referring-to-a-Manual-as-a-Whole.html
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texinfo


== Org-mode

Not surprisingly, Org-mode has a crazy number of link options:

https://orgmode.org/manual/Link-Format.html
https://orgmode.org/manual/Internal-Links.html
https://orgmode.org/manual/External-Links.html

Amusingly, "internal links" reverse AsciiDoc's `[[]]` and `<<>>` anchor and xref syntax:

----
<<foo>> This is info about foo.

Here is a link to [[foo]].
----

But most relevant to the AsciiDoc situation is Org-mode's publishing process, which is impressive:

> To create a link from one Org file to another, you would use something like ‘[[file:foo.org][The foo]]’ or simply ‘[[file:foo.org]]’ (see External Links). When published, this link becomes a link to ‘foo.html’. You can thus interlink the pages of your “Org web” project and the links will work as expected when you publish them to HTML. If you also publish the Org source file and want to link to it, use an ‘http’ link instead of a ‘file:’ link, because ‘file’ links are converted to link to the corresponding ‘.html’ file. 

> Eventually, links between published documents can contain some search options (see Search Options), which will be resolved to the appropriate location in the linked file. For example, once published to HTML, the following links all point to a dedicated anchor in ‘foo.html’.

----
    [[file:foo.org::*heading]]
    [[file:foo.org::#custom-id]]
    [[file:foo.org::target]]
----

https://orgmode.org/manual/Publishing-links.html


== Wikis

From the original WikiWikiWeb to MediaWiki, linking between documents ("pages") is fundamental to Wikis.

----
A link in WikiWikiWeb is CamelCaseLikeThis.

A link in MediaWiki uses brackets like [[foo]] or  [[foo|Foo Description]].
----

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WikiWikiWeb
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creole_(markup)

Wiki pages may or may not be stored in files and they are often converted on the fly to HTML for viewing. It is fundamental to wikis that all link conversion is completely automatic and as frictionless as possible.


== TeX / LaTeX

It looks like inter-document linking can absolutely be done, but it requires additional "packages" such as `xr` and/or `zref`. But the "external document" has to be declared in the calling document. I don't think this is something to be emulated.

https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/14364/cross-referencing-between-different-files

== troff/Groff/nroff/etc.

Troff is truly for stand-alone documents and manual pages. They have traditional bibiographic-style "references", but virtually no concept of linking other than URL hyperlinks and email address links (which PDF and HTML export types seem to understand) (which PDF and HTML export types seem to understand).

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troff
https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/groff_man.7.html
